From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitrov. This is the daily. [music]
[music]
President Trump's trade war against
China has so [music] far proven much
harder to win than his administration
ever let on. [music]
And it's only getting worse as China
undertakes its most aggressive act of
retaliation to date.
Today, [music] my colleague Keith
Bradshshire on a potential turning point
in the standoff as President Trump meets
this week with Chinese leader Xi Jinping
[music]
and what will be their first talks since
the trade war began.
[music]
It's Wednesday, [music] October 29th.
Keith, I think a lot of us, frankly,
started to feel as though this trade war
may have finally died down. I think we
were lulled perhaps into a false sense
of calm when there wasn't that much news
on this for months. But then all of a
sudden, things seemed to heat back up
again. So give us a sense of the state
of the relationship right now.
>> The relationship is at one of its
tensest moments in years. Both sides
have threatened measures bordering on
economic warfare against each other.
There's an urgency to resolving these
issues at the meeting on Thursday in
South Korea between the two countries
top leaders. Here in Beijing, everyone
is watching to see can they reach some
kind of a deal that pulls both countries
back from the brink.
>> And what are the main sticking points
right now in these negotiations? Like
what do we expect to come up in that
meeting?
>> The United States wants China to start
buying soybeans again. China has a
boycott against American soybeans right
now because of its unhappiness with
American policies. The United States
wants China to stop shipping the
chemicals that are used in Mexico and
Latin America to make fentanyl.
China wants the United States to allow
it to buy any kinds of semiconductors it
wants, including some of the most
advanced semiconductors used in
artificial intelligence and high
performance military systems. And China
in particular wants America to distance
itself from Taiwan,
although America depends enormously on
Taiwan for semiconductors.
But hanging over all of these issues
is a big debate over rare earth metals.
China is threatening to cut off much of
the world's supply and it's saying that
it will block any effort outside of
China to manufacture rare earths and
rare earth magnets in competition with
China. Can you just unpack what exactly
China did because this was something
that I think a lot of people were
talking about as a major escalation.
There were new restrictions right on
these rare earth minerals. These are
critically important to you know
everything from missiles to cars. We
need them and China was saying you can't
have them. What exactly happened?
>> Rare earths are very important these
days. They are used all over the economy
whether it's cars, computer chips,
fighter jets, missiles. China controls
the materials, rare earth metals for
making them anywhere in [clears throat]
the world. And it has put already in
April some export controls on supplying
those materials. And on October 9th,
China said, "We're going to put a lot
more restrictions on these." [music]
China is expanding its restrictions on
rare earth's exports.
The new rules do three things. One, they
prevent the West from being able to
build its own mines [music] and
refineries and magnet factories, or at
least they make it much more difficult
for the West to do that.
So, no more using any Chinese patents
without permission. No more buying
equipment from China to do any of this.
And China makes almost all the equipment
for mining and refining rare earths or
making magnets.
Second, the new rules put restrictions
on what you are allowed to move across
any country's borders if it has Chinese
magnets and rare earths inside [music]
it. And third, China is saying for the
first time that it's going to restrict
even more kinds of rare earths than it
did the first time around last April.
And so this will affect even more
military production, [music]
for example,
making it hard for Europe to build
weapon systems for Ukraine or for Europe
to protect itself against Russia.
[music]
>> Mr. Trump just announced a 100% add-on
tariff to China for their export
controls on rare earths. [music]
>> And look at this selloff
>> tonight. The stock market plunging
nearly 900 points at the close.
>> This is China versus the world. They
have pointed a bazooka at the supply
chains and the industrial base [music]
of the entire free world. And that's why
Treasury Secretary Scott Bessant said
that these new rules are a bazooka aimed
at the entire world's supply chains.
[music]
>> And you know, we're not going to have
it.
>> I have to say for me, this is like a
control freaks approach to trade
restrictions. Is this normal? Like do
countries typically make their trade
rules this specific, this indepth so as
to control every aspect of how a product
is used?
>> The United States has done this with the
fastest semiconductors.
So about the top 3 to 5% of the world's
semiconductors do have these very
restrictive rules from the United States
that do track what downstream products
they are later built into.
What is new and different about China's
rules
is that China is putting the
restrictions on a raw material
and then saying that products that are
later manufactured from that raw
material are also restricted. So in a
way this is a combination of the US
rules on semiconductors
combined with the Arab oil embargo in
1973 against the United States and its
allies which was aimed at halting
American support for Israel at the time.
So it is both a high-tech restriction
and in China's case it is now also a raw
material restriction both at the same
time. Can I ask Keith, do you agree with
Bessant's assessment that this is China
pulling out a bazooka?
>> I really do. This is China trying to
make sure that it controls global
commerce and can turn on and off the
taps, not just for goods leaving China,
but for goods moving across Europe,
across North America, across South Asia,
you name it. This is seeking a new
global level of comprehensive
control out of Beijing by the Ministry
of Commerce.
>> And how should we interpret the fact
that China's decided to do this now? Is
that a sign that the Chinese government
has kind of reached a point of no return
in these negotiations that they're using
what sounds like one of their biggest
points of leverage? China has concluded
that it benefits from taking very strong
stands
towards Trump and also towards Europe.
This is a China that is not allowing
itself to be pushed around. We've now
seen top Chinese leaders line up with
the leaders of Russia and North Korea at
military parades twice in six weeks in
Beijing and then in Pyongyang.
And so, China has really in some ways
embarked on a new geopolitical stance
and a new economic stance of standing
tough against the West to protect
China's strategic interests
>> and for the rest of us, for the rest of
the world, what are the implications?
>> For the rest of the world, this could be
extremely damaging. Any country with an
advanced manufacturing sector has to be
really worried about this.
[music]
We'll be right back.
Let's talk about what you mean, Keith,
when you said this could be extremely
damaging. Spell out for me what kind of
damage we'd be looking at in the US with
these restrictions.
>> There is the immediate damage of
American companies continuing to have
trouble getting enough rare earth
magnets just to make their day-to-day
products. Detroit has been struggling to
get enough brake motors, steering
motors, power seat motors, all these
different systems that require rare
earth magnets. And as more of these
Chinese regulations from October 9th
take effect, it will become even harder
for American companies, for example,
even to move parts across the border
from Mexico or across the border from
Canada.
>> What about the national security
implications of this? because you've
told us rare earths go into missiles, go
into a ton of military equipment.
>> The West is already having trouble in
slowing down production of some military
items because of the shortage of rare
earths.
The West failed to stockpile these rare
earths in advance. And so the military
contractors trying to supply Ukraine or
trying to rebuild inventories in the
west are really having trouble procuring
the magnets they need. So this is a big
win for Russia because the West really
needs these rare earths to continue
supplying military equipment to Ukraine
to defend itself. And now that supply
has been cut off cold by China.
>> Fascinating. This clearly [snorts] has
pretty big consequences for Europe,
which is honestly kind of surprising. I
thought this was a US China trade war.
Why is China now putting the screws to
Europe? China has a whole separate
dispute going with Europe over cars. The
European Union became very concerned
last year that China had subsidized the
development of electric cars and was
going to flood the European market with
electric cars.
And so the European Union put tariffs in
place and there was a big loophole left
in these tariffs which is that if you
put a tiny gasoline engine in along with
a great big electric system in these
cars then you don't pay any tariffs at
all. And so China has been flooding the
European market, particularly this year,
with exactly that category of highly
capable electric cars with a tiny
gasoline engine included. And they don't
face any extra tariff.
China does not want Europe to raise the
tariffs. It does not want Europe to
close the hybrid loophole. So China is
putting a lot of pressure on Europe. And
then finally, China's leaned towards
Russia on the Ukraine issue. China wants
Europe to distance itself from the
United States in NATO. So, China has a
lot of incentives to
be very tough with Europe and has been
very tough with Europe this year.
>> Listening to you, Keith, I have to say
it does seem as though China has the
ability to inflict just enormous pain
with this. If China is willing to go
this far in the trade war, it does seem
fair to say that they have the upper
hand. Am I wrong about that?
>> Short-term, China does have a very
strong position, but there are real
long-term dangers to the Chinese economy
in pursuing this strategy. Hm.
>> So many multinational companies have
come to rely on China for part or all of
their supplies of many components, many
products that you see in stores all over
the United States. And as China shows
that it's willing practically overnight
to halt these supplies, China is
damaging its reputation as a reliable
supplier. European and American
companies are frantically searching for
ways to buy more from Southeast Asia,
from India, and from elsewhere.
>> So, there is a long-term interest in
China in not taking this too far. In
fact, it's already gone far enough that
they are worried in China that they may
be losing their appeal as a destination
for foreign investment. Who wants to
build another factory in China if you're
not going to be able to send the goods
from that factory out of China?
>> It's interesting. It's like China in
trying to show the world, look, you
really can't live without us. You can't
live without our rare earths. Beijing
may actually be spurring the world to
look for ways to live without it, to
find a way to reduce that reliance on
China for just about everything. That is
exactly right. China is not backing down
in any way. China is all in on
restricting rare earths. That's a risky
position to be in when you're a country
like China that lives on exports even as
the domestic economy is a mess. So,
China may have overplayed its hand. But
it seems equally possible, plausible
even, that the US actually overplayed
its hand because it's forced China into
this point of no return where now it's
pulling out the big guns, where now it's
using its biggest point of leverage and
forcing everyone into a corner.
It's possible the US has overplayed its
hand, but the US is in a very difficult
position
because China has enormous overcapacity
of factories. And just last Thursday, we
had a pivotal moment. The central
committee of the entire Communist Party
said, "We're going to double down on
manufacturing. We want to be the country
that makes everything."
And that is a direct challenge to the
United States and Europe which still
have some manufacturing sectors and to
Japan and to South Korea.
This emphasis on making practically all
kinds of advanced technology is really a
worry. And so the United States is on
the spot now. Does it take a short-term
strategy of
accepting a deal that gets it back to
where it was at the start of the year
but risks further deterioration of
what's left of the American
manufacturing sector or does it continue
to have a confrontation but that could
be very painful?
>> So are you saying it's possible that the
US overplayed its hand but it had no
other option? The US was not in a good
position to begin with and the Biden
administration had struggled with the
same issue. The Biden strategy was to
proceed cautiously and avoid an outright
confrontation unlike Trump. But the
Biden administration also had the
weakness of not really slowing down
China's remarkable race towards
dominance of an extremely wide range of
manufacturing industries. And so the
Trump administration felt a need to go
considerably farther and that has now
triggered an outsized response from
Beijing. You're sort of saying it's like
you're damned if you do, you're damned
if you don't. If you don't go hard
enough to try to combat China's
dominance in manufacturing, nothing
actually gets done about it. But if you
do go too hard, you risk eliciting this
kind of really potentially damaging
retaliation.
>> That's exactly right, Natalie. But has
all this poking of the bear that the
Trump administration's done actually
done anything to slow China's
progression toward the most dominant
superpower manufacturing country that
we've ever seen?
>> Yes, the Trump administration tariffs
have resulted in a significant drop in
Chinese exports to the United States,
more than 20% this year compared to last
year. On the other hand, China has been
ramping up exports to other countries
such as Vietnam, and you get estimates
that as much as 85% of China's exports
to Vietnam then end up in the United
States. So, Chinese exporters have been
very nimble in finding alternative
routes through countries like Vietnam
and Mexico to still reach the US market.
But the Trump administration felt it
needed to do something because the US
industrial base has been rapidly
hollowing out. And without a strong
manufacturing sector, the US cannot
remain a strong country with a strong
conventional military that can protect
not only the United States but other
democracies around the world.
The situation you've described is one
where the stakes are just incredibly
high for both sides. So at this meeting
between Trump and she this week, what
should we expect to see? Do you expect a
dramatic announcement or just the
continuation of what we've seen before,
which is incremental agreements,
temporary pauses,
etc.? I expect a dramatic announcement
of temporary agreements and incremental
changes. [laughter]
[snorts] I think that what we will see
is a postponement, for example, of
China's rare earth restrictions, but not
a repeal of them. I think we are likely
to see some Chinese purchases of
American soybeans, but not on a scale
that they previously were.
One other aspect that we'll probably see
is some kind of Chinese promise to limit
exports of chemicals used in making
fentinel.
[music]
And then we may see a promise to get
together and have a more indepth
conversation in China next February.
>> So a narrow deal perhaps announced with
great fanfare. [music]
>> Exactly.
The two count's leaders might be able to
establish a floor for the relationship
here. They might begin to change the
trajectory so that next year they can
begin to patch together something
better.
Because if they don't, then we could be
headed for ever greater confrontation
between two superpowers with enormous
ability to harm each other and the
entire world.
>> [music]
>> Well, Keith, thank you. Thanks for
making us all smarter in anticipation
[music] of it.
>> Thank you. Always good to talk to you,
Natalie.
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you should know today.
[music] Hurricane Melissa made landfall
on Tuesday and it carved a path of
destruction across Jamaica as one of the
strongest category 5 storms on record.
[music]
It wasn't clear exactly how much damage
Jamaica had sustained because of limited
communications, but Jamaican officials
said that [music] 15,000 people were in
government shelters.
More than half a million people or about
a sixth of the country's population
[music]
were without power.
And on Tuesday, Defense Secretary Pete
Hgsith said the Trump [music]
administration had launched yet another
round of deadly strikes on boats [music]
that it claims were smuggling drugs,
killing 14 people in four vessels.
Hegath said the [music] strikes took
place in international waters and that
there had been one survivor. The attacks
bring the overall death [music] toll in
the growing US military campaign off the
Central and South American coasts to 57.
[music]
Finally, Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu ordered [music] the Israeli
military to conduct strikes in Gaza on
Tuesday. The Israeli government accused
Hamas of violating the ceasefire
agreement [music] by firing on Israeli
forces and failing to return the bodies
of dead hostages.
Netanyahu's office said the [music]
prime minister had informed President
Trump before the action was taken. Hamas
denied involvement in an attack on
[music] Israeli forces and in a
statement said it remained committed to
the ceasefire agreement [music]
which it accused Israel of violating.
[music]
Today's [music] episode was produced by
Mary Wilson and Ricky Nevetski. It was
edited [music] by Lisa Chow.
contains original music by Dan Pal,
[music]
Marian Lozano, and Pat McCusker and was
engineered by Alyssa [music] Moxley.
[music]
[music] That's it for the Daily. I'm
Natalie Kitroof. See you tomorrow.